

                        Attribute Subroutines


There are two types of attribute subroutines: Set and Query.  The Set
subroutines are used to set the characteristics of items to be plotted.
The Query subroutines, in turn, return the characteristics that are
currently set.  The Set and Query subroutines come in pairs; for every
Set subroutine there is a Query.  All Set subroutines are named "GSxxx"
and all Query subroutines are named "GQxxx."

In general, attribute Set routines control the size and the line width
of items to be plotted.  When specified as a real number, the size of an
item is a multiplier of the default size value.  For some plottables,
additional attributes are also present.  For example, each category of 
lines includes attributes that control the different line types.  Or, 
some items can be optionally plotted on some devices using hardware 
functions; the attributes include flags that select the hardware or the 
software method.  Color can also be set, but color is handled (and 
described) separately.  Assigning an attribute a value less than or 
equal to zero means that no change will be made to that attribute's
current value, unless explicity stated otherwise in the documentation.

To set attributes of lines, several Set routines can be called as there
are several categories of lines: simple lines, contours, special lines,
and fronts.  Attributes for simple lines are set by a call to GSLINE.
The attributes include selection of line width, selection of several
predefined line patterns, and selection of software/hardware plotting
methods.  Software line pattern characteristics are further controlled
by calling GSLPAT.  The other line categories, contours, special lines,
and fronts, are controlled by GSCNTR, GSSPLN, and GSFRNT.

GSTEXT is called to set the text font, text size, text line width, and
a flag specifying generation of software or hardware text.

There are several groups of symbols that can be plotted, each group with
an independent set of attributes.  The symbol groups include weather
symbols, sky coverage, past weather, pressure tendency, cloud type,
icing, turbulence, and special symbols.  The subroutines that set the
symbol attributes include GSWTHR, GSSKY, GSPWTH, GSPTND, GSCTYP, GSICNG,
GSTURB, and GSSPCL.

GSMRKR sets marker characteristics.  Markers are similar to symbols.

GSTICK sets the characteristics of tick marks for drawing graph axes.

GSBARB and GSARRW set the wind barb and wind arrow attributes.

The hardware plotting method option, when present, should be used
cautiously.  If a hardware function is specified, and the currently set
device is not capable of that hardware function, the equivalent software
function is substituted automatically.  However, if a hardware function
is specified, and the hardware function is available, but it is not
capable of satisfying some of the other attribute settings, the hardware
function is used regardless.  In those cases the hardware function may
produce undesirable results.  For example, the hardware option does not
draw dashed lines very well on many graphics devices when a large set of
short line segments is drawn, such as is often used for drawing maps or
contours.  Or, on some devices, rotated text does not come out rotated
when hardware text is specified.
