

                         Control Subroutines


Control Of Plot Space


GSDEVA is often the second subroutine called by an application program.
It specifies the graphics device for plotting.  GSDEVA is called before
any plotting begins because several transformations are not fully
defined until a plotting device is established.  When the plotting
device is identified, the associated device driver is installed.  The
device driver becomes a separate sub-process spawned by GPLT.



Frames And Animation


An application program may produce a single picture, or it may create a
sequence of frames.  The sequence of frames may be a slide show (each
frame in the sequence has no relation to adjacent frames), or it may
form a movie loop (an animation sequence).

When more than a single frame is plotted, subroutine GSTANM is usually
the third subroutine called by an application program.  It establishes
the start of a sequence of frames.  Plotting and drawing that follows
is rendered to the first frame of the sequence until an explicit change
to the next frame is made.

After some drawing and plotting takes place to a frame, subroutine
GEPLOT is called to flush the buffers.  If the currently set device
driver is an interactive driver, such as a display screen, the plotted
image appears on the screen when the buffers are flushed.

Subroutine GCLEAR is used to clear the current frame.  A program may
plot over and over to the same frame, calling GEPLOT and GCLEAR as often
as desired, or the program may advance to the next frame and plot.

A frame may be given a title with a call to GMESG.

A call to subroutine GSPLOT advances to a new frame.  Typically, a
program calls GEPLOT to end one frame, GSPLOT to start the next frame,
followed by more plotting commands.

To end a sequence of frames, the last frame is closed with a call to
GEPLOT, then the frame sequence is ended with a call to GENANM.

An interactive program, that has generated an animation frame sequence,
may set the frames in motion for the viewer.  Subroutine GLOOPC provides
the control functions.



Windows


Some drivers can handle several output channels simultaneously.  For
example, the XW driver can have several windows open at the same time
and plot to each one separately.  Every output channel is differentiated
from the others by its unique name (the window name for XW).  A program,
that has several output channels open, switches between them by calling
subroutine GSLWIN.



Miscellaneous


For interactive programs, subroutine GGTPNT gets X and Y point pairs
from a user's mouse button clicks.

For certain devices, those that use an intermediate plot file,
subroutines GCLOSP and GOUTP close and display the contents of such a
plot file.
