

                   Location (LC) Library 


The GEMPAK location library provides subroutines for defining data
subset and graphics areas in GEMPAK.

Areas containing subareas may now be defined using the subroutines
LC_SARE and LC_UARE.  Subareas must be separated by slashes (/).  
Each subarea is additive (+) or subtractive (-), depending on the 
first character following the slash, with + being the default.  
Additive subareas add stations to the list of valid stations; 
subtractive subareas eliminate stations which were previously valid.

Subareas may be specified in the following ways:


     1.  lat1;lon1;lat2;lon2 
            This defines a latitude/longitude range where
            (lat1, lon1) is the lower left corner and
            (lat2, lon2) is the upper right corner.

                            or

         #clat;clon;dlat;dlon
             This defines a latitude/longitude range where
             (clat-dlat, clon-dlon) is the lower left corner
             (clat+dlat, clon+dlon) is the upper right corner.

     2.  GEOG
             This is an abbreviation for a geographic area
             defined in the GEMPAK geographic table which
             includes abbreviations for states, provinces and
             countries, as well as other names.  If #GEOG is
             entered, the user's geographic table, GEOG.TBL,
             will be searched.  A * or - after the name may
             be used to reduce/expand the area.

     3.  STN
             This defines an area centered on a station found
             in the GEMPAK station table, which contains US
             and Canadian surface stations.  A * or - after
             the name may be used to reduce/expand the area.

     4.  DSET 
             This includes all the stations in the current dataset.

     5.  @ST  
             This area includes those stations located in the state,
             province or country defined by ST.  Only some countries
             are recognized (US,CN,MX,CI,BW,AU); other countries
             may be specified using method 6.

     6.  @CN:C
             This area includes those stations located in the
             country defined by CN.

     7.  @STN1;STN2;...;STNn 
             This area includes the stations listed, where STNn
             may be a station identifier or a station number.

     8.  SHDR:iloval:ihival 
             This area defines a range of valid values for the
             station header, SHDR.  For example, SELV:0:2000
             specifies stations whose elevations are less than
             2000 meters.

Graphics areas must be specified using methods 1 - 3.

Subroutines to set and check bounds, LC_SBND and LC_INBN, are included
to maintain compatibility with earlier versions of GEMPAK.
 
